---
type: source
title: "Utilisation of data and factors affecting HMIS performance: six Synods of Livingstonia health facilities in Malawi"
publisher: Archives of Public Health 83:254
url: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12539031/
author: Salangwa C, Munthali R, Mfune L, Nyirenda VK
published: 2025-10-21
accessed: 2026-07-11
ingested: 2026-07-11
places: [MWI]
topics: [dpi.mis, data.statistics, capacity.training, gov.standards]
entities: [[hmis-malawi-livingstonia], [dhis2]]
lens: []
---

<!-- Scholarly publication (cross-sectional, Aug 2023, 6 SoLHD facilities, 103 participants). 70% of facility respondents used HMIS data vs 33.3% of district respondents; 31.4% of facility staff had no HMIS training in prior 24 months. Barriers: no SOPs, weak resources/supervision/incentives. Malawi uses DHIS2. Home page for [[hmis-malawi-livingstonia]]. -->

. 2025 Oct 21;83:254. doi: [10.1186/s13690-025-01745-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13690-025-01745-7)

[Chisomo Salangwa](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Salangwa%20C%22[Author]) <sup>1,</sup><sup>2,</sup><sup>✉</sup>, [Reston Munthali](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Munthali%20R%22[Author]) <sup>2</sup>, [Lusungu Mfune](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Mfune%20L%22[Author]) <sup>2</sup>, [Vegha Kaunga Nyirenda](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Nyirenda%20VK%22[Author]) <sup>2</sup>

PMCID: PMC12539031 PMID: [41121431](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/41121431/)

## Abstract

### Background

A collection of data routinely gathered at healthcare facilities to satisfy the requirements of health service statistics is called a Health Management Information System (HMIS). The purpose of this study was to ascertain how HMIS data were used and what variables affected the health system performance of Synod of Livingstonia Health Facilities at the district and basic healthcare institution levels.

### Methods

This cross-sectional study included six healthcare facilities in three districts: Mzimba South, Mzimba North, and Rumphi. Health workers at the institutional and district levels completed a semi-structured questionnaire to gather data, which was then recorded using an observational checklist. Responses and observations were combined and triangulated using a thematic content analysis approach to extract pertinent information.

### Results

Thirteen district officials and 90 employees of healthcare facilities were surveyed in the Synod of Livingstonia Health Department (SoLHD). Only one of the three district respondents 33.3%=(1/3) reported regularly reviewing HMIS data, compared to over two-thirds 70%=(63/90) of the facility respondents who said they used the data. Primarily, HMIS data were utilised to compare service coverage performance 62%=(56/90) track illness trends over time 40%=(36/90) and provide support for community health education and promotion initiatives 53%=(48/90). Before the study, 31.4%=(28/90) of the facility staff had not received any training on HMIS-related data handling in the previous 24 months. Four months before this assessment, the District Health Office (DHO) conducted supervisory visits to less than half 34.6%=(3/9) of the health facilities. Two district respondents 66.7%=(2/3) stated that higher authorities routinely provided them with comments on the calibration of their reports on a monthly and quarterly basis. Patient load has frequently been reported to impact staff performance in terms of data administration and gathering.

### Conclusion

In most healthcare facilities, inadequate analysis and poor data utilisation techniques are the norm. The main issues impacting HMIS performance in the Synod of Livingstonia Health Facilities were a lack of standard operating procedures for data management, insufficient financial and human resources, and a lack of incentives and oversight.

**Keywords:** Data management, District, Data analysis, Utilisation, Health system performance, Malawi, HMIS

---

<table><thead><tr><th align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Text box 1. Contributions to literature</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">• There is limited empirical evidence on the utilisation and challenges of HMIS at both facility and district levels within faith-based health systems in Malawi.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">• Demonstrates the disconnect between data collection and its application in planning and budgeting at the grassroots level.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">• It offers practical and empirical insights into how under-resourced health facilities can optimise HMIS performance with limited tools.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">• Contributes to literature on health information systems in low-resource, faith-based settings.</td></tr></tbody></table>

[Open in a new tab](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12539031/table/Taba/)

## Introduction

Planning and tracking the development of disease intervention programs requires the use of information and data analysis, two crucial elements of an efficient health delivery system. Health Management Information Systems (HMIS) have been implemented in numerous low- and middle-income nations to improve standard data management in healthcare facilities \[[^1], [^2]\]. The HMIS is supposed to calculate population-level illness morbidity and mortality rates, track historical trends, and quickly identify anomalous patterns. The underutilization of HMIS data in Malawi’s health system, particularly within faith-based health systems like the Synod of Livingstonia Health Department (SoLHD has created a big gap in promoting decision-making and service delivery.

The HMIS, created in Tanzania in the early 1990 s, was the main information system \[[^1], [^3], [^4]\]. Composed of facility-based health records, it serves as an indicator for data on morbidity, mortality, health infrastructure, and service coverage and is used for the routine administration of health services \[[^1], [^5]\]. The District Health Information System (DHIS2), a web-based software package for gathering, verifying, analysing, and presenting aggregate statistical data suited to integrated health information management activities, was adopted by the government of Malawi to improve the performance of the HMIS \[[^6]\]. The goal of DHIS2 adoption is to promote the utilisation and ease of data access \[[^6]\]. Correct information collection, analysis, interpretation, and use at all levels are essential for a health information system’s efficacy \[[^1], [^3], [^7], [^8]\]. Most of the time, however, disabled systems impair system performance and optimal operation.

In general, there is little use of data in all healthcare systems in many sub-Saharan African nations \[[^1], [^9], [^10]\]. The literature that is now available indicates that, even with a few noteworthy achievements, HMIS’s influence on African health systems’ decision-making processes is still modest \[[^11] – [^13]\]. It has been noted that several obstacles keep the HMIS from reaching its full potential in Africa \[[^1], [^14], [^15]\]. From a certain perspective, institutional, technological, human, and logistical capacities either facilitate or obstruct the effective application and utilisation of the data produced by HMIS \[[^9], [^16], [^17]\]. According to reports, the HMIS can help with health decision-making at all levels of the health system, but its true value can only be seen when it enables the conversion of generated data into actionable information and knowledge \[[^1], [^18]\].

At all levels of the health system, routine health information is crucial for operational and strategic decision-making. Healthcare spending depends on effective and trustworthy HMIS. Malawi as a country is investing more in disease management initiatives, therefore having a reliable health information system is essential to supporting decision-making at all levels and vice versa \[[^6], [^18], [^19]\]. It is anticipated that an enhanced HMIS would improve evidence-based policy and decision-making, improving accountability and effectiveness across the board for the health system. The Global Summit on Measurement and Accountability for Health has called for action for all countries to have health information flows involving utilising data locally to improve the effectiveness of disease programs to promote information utilisation and evidence-based decision-making \[[^18], [^20], [^21]\]. This study aimed to ascertain how HMIS data were used and what variables affected system performance in Malawi primary healthcare facilities and districts.

## Materials and methods

### Study sites and design

In August 2023, six health institutions affiliated with the Synod of Livingstonia in the districts of Mzimba South, Mzimba North, and Rumphi in Malawi \[[^22]\] participated in this cross-sectional survey. Primary data collection was performed at the main facility and health centre. The districts are divided into five geographical zones. The research facilities and districts within the zones were selected using a multistage sampling procedure \[[^23], [^24]\]. Three districts were chosen from the five zones, and within each zone, six facilities were chosen at random using Microsoft Excel’s random generator feature.

### Sample size and data collection

To collect the data required for the study, mixed approaches using both qualitative and quantitative techniques were used \[[^23]\]. To ensure the content validity of the data, a standard questionnaire and observational checklist created in collaboration with subject matter experts were used to gather the data \[[^24]\]. Staff members of health facilities and district offices were interviewed in-depth using semi-structured interview guides, to ensure comprehension and accuracy, the semi-structured interview guides were developed in English and subsequently translated into Chichewa, the primary local language spoken in the study areas. Before use in the study, the translated instruments underwent a pre-test to determine their dependability. Information on data management, including analysis and utilisation, gaps in the field, and difficulties, was gathered through a questionnaire. Respondents were questioned about how feedback from various levels was obtained and how the data were used and analysed at their respective levels. At this point, all methods for data administration, analysis, and use, including those involving displays found in medical facilities or district offices, have been observed and documented. Meeting minutes were also examined to determine whether data use was discussed regularly in meetings. Documentation included the presence of specialised personnel in charge of data management and health information systems, staff training on HMIS, and organisational and behavioural assessment capabilities.A semi-structured questionnaire and observational checklist were developed by the research team in collaboration with subject matter experts in health information systems. These tools were pre-tested among a small group of healthcare workers to ensure clarity and relevance before being finalized for use in the study. The tools were designed to collect data on HMIS data utilization practices, challenges, staff training, supervision visits, and organizational support. A total of 103 participants were included in the study, comprising 90 health facility workers and 13 district-level officials.The study included health facility staff members such as clinical officers, nurses, midwives, laboratory technicians, patient attendants, and HMIS officers, as well as district-level officials including District Medical Officers, Reproductive Health Focal Persons, and DHMT members.

### Data management and analysis

In-depth interviews were conducted using a thematic content analysis. The researchers translated the interviews into English to briefly describe them. Several transcript readings were used to create a code list for manual analysis. Open coding was used to identify significant themes and sub-themes that appeared in the data and were subsequently connected to the goal of the study after this analysis. Methods for analysing and using the data were compiled. Triangulation of the results from both approaches allowed for interpretation. When it was necessary to quantify the results, data were compiled into proportions.

## Results

### The sociodemographic attributes of the participants

Three districts and six health facilities were included in the study. Ninety employees of healthcare facilities under the SoLHD were surveyed and interviewed. Approximately 64.1%=(66/103) of the interviewed employees in these health facilities had undergraduate qualifications. The majority of the responses were from patient attendance and clinical officers 23.3%=(24/103) followed by midwives 14.6%=(15/103) and nurses 12.6%=(13/103). Of the respondents, the majority 55.3%=(57/103) had more than 11 years of work experience (see more details in Table [1](#Tab1)). Thirteen members of the District Health Management Team (DHMT) were interviewed at the District Health Office: five in Mzimba North, four in Mzimba South, and four in Rumphi. Reproductive Health Focal Persons, District HMIS, and District Medical Officers were among these.

#### Table 1.

Sociodemographic attributes of the participants

<table><thead><tr><th align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Variable</th><th align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Response</th><th align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Frequency</th><th align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"><em>n</em> / <em>N</em> %</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Gender</td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Female</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">42</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">40.8%=(42/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Male</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">61</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">59.2%=(61/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Education level</td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Secondary</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">15</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">14.6%=(15/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Undergraduate</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">66</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">64.1%=(66/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Postgraduate</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">22</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">21.4%=(22/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Job Experience</td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">< 4</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">27</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">26.2%=(27/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">5–10</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">19</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">18.4%=(19/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">> 11</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">57</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">55.3%=(57/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Positions</td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">HMIS Officer</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">11</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">10.7%=(11/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Medical Doctor</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">6</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">5.8%=(6/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Clinical Officer</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">24</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">23.3%=(24/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Patient attendance</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">24</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">23.3%=(24/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Laboratory Officer</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">10</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">9.7%=(10/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Midwife</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">15</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">14.6%=(15/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Nurse</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">13</td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1">12.6%=(13/103)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1">Total</td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td><td align="center" colspan="1" rowspan="1"><strong>103</strong></td><td align="left" colspan="1" rowspan="1"></td></tr></tbody></table>

[Open in a new tab](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12539031/table/Tab1/)

Source: Author

### HMIS data utilization practices

It was discovered that fewer than 50%=(3/6) of the facilities performed appropriate analyses and plotted graphs to demonstrate the disease burden. 62%=(56/90) of the facilities stated that they made use of the HMIS data they gathered. 53%=(48/90) of the data were used for public health education and promotion in their service regions, 63%=(57/90) were used to compare performance in terms of service coverage, and fifty per cent were used to determine the facility requirements for pharmaceuticals and other medical supplies (28%=(25/90). The top 10 diseases were the most frequently recognised data categories in the healthcare facilities (67%=(60/90). Of the facilities, 48.2%=(43/90) displayed the results of recent data analysis (indicated to be in the past 6 months). Nevertheless, most of the material that was shown lacked dates, making it challenging to determine the period that was recorded. While most facilities only provided diseases and disorders without any statistics to compare values, most indicated the top ten diseases. Within the healthcare facilities, differences in data processing and displays were noted among the departments. The majority of the presentations focused on statistics on family planning, open patient departments (OPD), and indicators of child and reproductive health. Most participants stated that the calibration of data gathered by their establishments had an impact on its application in making evidence-based choices. They held the opinion that choices are made at the facility and district levels based on available data or real needs. These included considering the facility’s financial capacity and the actual needs of the service population. It was also discovered that judgments at medical facilities were occasionally made through orders from higher authorities. Only a small percentage of employees said that their bosses were unaware of their good data usage practices, and over two-thirds expressed dissatisfaction about staff members being held accountable for subpar work rather than being recognised for exceptional work. Workers in healthcare facilities overwhelmingly concurred that they understand the significance of gathering health information and the need to submit it to proper authorities at the appropriate level. Nonetheless, most respondents concurred that gathering information for non-decision-making purposes deters them. The majority of the healthcare facilities 89.3%=(80/90) reported holding regular meetings to discuss management and administrative issues. Nearly all the health facilities 99.2%=(89/90) kept formal records of the meetings, and the majority 66.6%=(60/90) stated that the meetings took place every month. Additionally, copies of the proceedings of prior meetings were made available by at least half 55%=(50/90) of the facilities within the corresponding quarters. Upon examination of the proceedings, the majority 72.8%=(65/90) lacked data to serve as a discussion agenda. Observations from some of the sessions revealed data-related issues, such as the management of HMIS (data quality and reporting) 47%=(42/90) and the conversation surrounding commodities stock-outs 59%=(53/90). The majority 80.3%=(72/90) chose their course of action after talking about it. In the last six months, over half 54.1%=(49/90) of the institutions reported attending meetings called by the District Health Office (DHO) to discuss HMIS data.

### Facility-Level vs. District-Level differences

Over half of the respondents 61.5%=(8/13) reported using district-level data. According to the district responses, the district targets were primarily monitored and evaluated using HMIS data. They stated that data from the HMIS are used in reports that their districts generate. Quarterly reports from the DHMT, yearly District Health Plans, and reports on reproductive and child health were among the often generated reports. Nine out of the fifteen district respondents stated that higher authorities routinely provided them with input regarding the calibration of their HMIS summary reports. Eight respondents, however, stated that, after obtaining the monthly HMIS results, the district office did not provide feedback reports on medical facilities.

Eleven district respondents reported examining HMIS data, six of whom did so. As demonstrated by one response,

> *“We do not have regularly planned meetings consequently proceedings of the meetings are not available (Rumphi DHO)*,*”*

A substantial number (10/13) of respondents stated that the district office did not regularly have meetings to evaluate HMIS information.

> *“We have low-quality data because very few employees have gotten adequate training in data management (Mzimba North DHO)”.*

District-level utilisation and promotion of reported data were demonstrated in three instances: supply procurement, demand forecasting, yearly budgeting, and public health education.

> *“The data assist us in budgeting and forecasting on-demand and procurement”*, *remarked one district respondent (Mzimba North DHO)”.*

Districts were questioned about whether facilities with superior HMIS performance were considered when allocating funding. Three districts under investigation (Mzimba North, Mzimba South, and Rumphi District) have HMIS focal persons who indicate that resources are allocated with priority to facilities that perform well. Only one district, Rumphi, reported that facility performance was not considered when allocating resources and support. The size of the facility, number of clients serviced, number of services provided, prevalence of the disease, location, and priority of the services were among the other factors considered while allocating resources in the annual plans per district. To monitor the performance of the Synod of Livingstonia Health Facilities, only the districts of Mzimba North and South were able to supply performance improvement tools, including flow and control charts. Of the districts, more than half 69.2%=(9/13) said they had a system in place for raising money for HMIS while half of the respondents said they had long-term financial plans in place to fund HMIS operations and the other half said they did not.

### Challenges affecting HMIS performance

The number of employees in each facility who were directly in charge of HMIS operations varied within districts. The inadequate availability of human resources for data management was mentioned by every facility that responded. Most individuals in charge of HMIS operations stated that they had only received cursory training in data management, with a narrow emphasis on correct documentation, data gathering, and reports that only included very basic analysis or interpretation. Few, meanwhile, asserted that they had received no other training beyond on-the-job training. Twenty-four months before this survey, a sizable fraction 31.4%=(28/90) of the facility’s staff had not received any training on HMIS-related data management. Each facility had an average of five employees working on HMIS tasks, ranging from report compilation to recording, and over 20 employees had received training over the preceding 12 months. The six employees who were said to be directly involved with HMIS were also required to attend other events. It was alleged that data management was jeopardized because there were so few employees participating in HMIS operations. The low human capacity in HMIS to apply the analytical tools and procedures to synthesize information for decision-making was highlighted by district key informants as one of the primary challenges. Insufficient training was cited as the cause of this inefficiency. Of the 90, very few said they had district training plans. The staff’s inadequate in-service training on data management was the reason for the lack of funding. Every HMIS focal person in the facilities stated that they had received training and had been given HMIS training documents to refer to when performing HMIS-related duties. Over 60%=(54/90) of facilities participants ( stated that those in charge of HMIS operations were also in charge of other tasks.

### Supervision and feedback mechanisms

Out of the six health facilities, two 33.3%=(2/6) reported receiving supportive supervisory visits from district office personnel in the four months preceding the assessment. On the other hand, more than half 61.4%=(54/90) said that the district supervision team did not bring a supervisory checklist with them when they visited. 82.1%=(74/90) of the facilities that responded said that the district team has audited the quality of their data. Only a small percentage of the health facilities 8.3%=(7/90) reported having a clear timetable for district supervisory inspections, whereas two-thirds of the facility respondents stated that the district team discussed the performance of the health facility based on the data provided. A portion of the responders 28.5%=(26/90) clarified that district teams frequently pay visits without notifying the relevant facilities. 33.4%=(30/90) of the respondents, or less than half, gave the district supervisory reports. The 85%=(11/13) and 92%=(12/13) DHO teams reported having supervisory reports and checklists, respectively, in contrast to the facility report.

### Training and capacity Building

It was common practice to employ separate protocols and records for receiving reports, which was linked to the loss of reports that were transferred from lower levels. There were some areas without an appropriate system in place to receive reports from medical facilities. In these 3 districts, a report may be given to anyone who happens to be in the district health office (DHO) when it is delivered, without their having to confirm that it was filled out correctly or even record or acknowledge its receipt. Only 68.2%=(61/90) of respondents acknowledged receiving feedback, mostly verbal, from the district health office regarding the quality of reports sent by health facility workers. These procedures and breakdowns in communication made it possible for the district to receive reports from the facility level that were incomplete, inaccurately filled out, or both.

> *As one respondent put it*, *“There were no written procedures*, *just verbal discussions were provided sometimes through phone calls.” Nearly all facilities (90%=81/90) said during interviews that there were no written procedures in place to address late*, *incomplete*, *inaccurate*, *and missing reports*, *including follow-up with the facility on data quality issues (Synod facilities).*

It was typical to see registers, tally sheets, or report forms without the name of the medical facility or the reporting period on them. Logbooks were found to be available in just two facilities for marking and reporting submitted reports. Simultaneously, it was noted that only one district had all facility forms stamped with the receiving date. Merely 40%=(36/90) of the districts stated that they had implemented quality control measures for entering data from paper-based to computer-based HMIS. Different HMIS tool versions were utilized by different facilities in different districts, although some versions lacked the relevant variables and indicators.

## Discussion

This study confirms that HMIS data utilisation remains low at the facility and district levels in Malawi. The majority of health workers perceive HMIS as a reporting mechanism rather than a tool for informed decision-making similar to findings in Ethiopia, Rwanda, and Zambia \[[^6]\]. Approximately two-thirds of the facilities stated that they use the HMIS data they gather, mostly for community health promotion and education, comparing service coverage performance, and identifying long-term patterns in disease. However, creating reports and annual planning was the main use of HMIS at the district level. This use implies that all relevant data gathered from healthcare facilities has been underutilized. While acknowledging that these are essential elements for sensible public health decision-making, several studies have shown shortcomings in Malawi’s data use and response \[[^6], [^10], [^25], [^26]\]. There have been reports of a comparable poor use of routine facility data from other parts of Sub-Saharan Africa \[[^11], [^27]\]. For instance, a study conducted in Ethiopia found that routine use of health information systems was correlated with training, data analytic abilities, supervision, frequent feedback, and a positive attitude \[[^2], [^27]\]. According to the results of this study and others, information is mostly gathered for reporting needs and is rarely used to guide decisions \[[^2], [^12], [^19]\]. Most health workers in low-income nations typically link HMIS with completing forms, gathering data, and sending reports to higher authorities without using it \[[^28], [^29]\].

According to studies conducted elsewhere, health institutions’ data are frequently underutilized to enhance patient care \[[^19], [^28], [^30]\]. Health information utilization at the primary health care and district level is generally low in Sub-Saharan Africa \[[^3], [^10]\]. According to reports, 57.9–62.7 per cent of Ethiopians use HMIS data for various decision-making purposes \[[^29], [^31], [^32]\]. According to a recent study conducted in Zanzibar, just 42% of healthcare professionals used HMIS data for planning, 35% for monitoring and assessment, 23% for managing supplies and medications, 18% for budgeting, and 1% for being ready for a disease epidemic \[[^5]\]. The motivation of the personnel, training, supportive supervision, competence, a positive perception of the health information culture, and decisions made by higher authority are all factors linked to the effective use of HMIS data \[[^32] – [^33]\].

The underperformance of HMIS in low- and middle-income countries has been attributed to several causes, including a lack of incentives and instruments, a lack of training and refresher courses, poor motivation, inadequate resources, and a shortage of staff and expertise \[[^34], [^35]\]. This study found that all healthcare facilities lacked sufficient human resources for data administration. The possibility of obtaining data quality was found to be boosted in an Ethiopian study by having a standard set of indicators, qualified human resources, well-designed reporting formats, and workers educated to fill formats \[[^29]\]. HMIS performance is influenced by organizational characteristics such as the culture of using information, the availability of resources, planning, governance, training, supportive supervision, and financial availability \[[^12]\]. Kasambara et al. discovered that frequent feedback provision and HMIS training were highly correlated with employee performance in Malawi.

The performance of the routine health information system was found to be significantly positively correlated with the availability of plans for HMIS, staff motivation, training, supervision of HMIS activities, and an adequate staffing level for HMIS tasks, according to a recent study conducted in Chad \[[^26]\]. Less than half of the health facilities in our present study indicated that district team members came to supervise them. Nevertheless, the team lacked a supervisory checklist while conducting supervision visits. It has already been noted that regular supervision, feedback, and data analysis abilities of healthcare professionals influence the effective adoption and use of standard health information systems \[[^3], [^6]\]. According to a Zambian study, the presence of Regional Health Information System (RHIS) professionals and self-efficacy have a direct impact on how HMIS data is used \[[^10]\].

Furthermore, it has been noted that strong performance in HMIS is strongly correlated with both supportive supervision and health facility performance ratings \[[^1], [^14]\]. One factor that has been identified as impeding health workers’ performance in data management is the absence of standard operating procedures (SOPs). It has been demonstrated that SOPs for data management at the level of health facilities in Rwanda can enhance the quality of HMIS data \[[^8], [^11]\].

Health information technicians did not make up the bulk of the HMIS focal persons in this study. One of the fundamental flaws found to have an impact on data performance in multiple studies is the absence of personnel with core competencies in data management and analysis \[[^7], [^8], [^18], [^36]\]. Analogous results have been shown in several research elsewhere \[[^20], [^35]\]. Synod of Livingstonia as well as the government must choose a suitable carder for data analysis and clarify roles at every level. As a result, a suitable team of knowledgeable and capable individuals at all levels is required. The human, supply, and process components of the HMIS must all be consistent and reliable for it to function well. Our results show alignment with past research indicating that motivation, training, and feedback improve data use \[[^35]\]. Notably, supportive supervision, presence of SOPs, and assigning qualified data personnel are necessary conditions for HMIS effectiveness.

### Implications

- For policy: Results support the urgent need for SOP development and structured supervision frameworks.
- For practice: Training and incentivising dedicated HMIS personnel can enhance data quality and use.
- For research: Further studies should explore behavioural and institutional determinants of HMIS uptake in faith-based facilities.

### Limitations

Even if the study’s findings are highly relevant, its design made an effort to reduce bias by making sure that facilities and districts were represented and by strengthening the validity of the results through the integration of real observations and interviews. It is subject to several restrictions. First, the results cannot be broadly extrapolated to other periods due to its cross-sectional design. The same study conducted at other times would yield different results since some of the replies had a time limit. Secondly, in keeping with the previous point, the results might only apply to Malawi and other nations with HMIS-like functionality. In a similar vein, some of the answers draw from the experiences of the interviewees. As a result, the results’ nature was greatly influenced by individuals present at the time of this assessment. Lastly, differences with a different set of respondents might be predicted given that health workers are not assigned at random.

## Conclusion

HMIS data are underutilised across both district and facility levels in Malawi despite being routinely collected. The key challenges include limited human resources, lack of SOPs, insufficient supervision, and inadequate training. The regular operation of Synod of Livingstonia’s health management information system was influenced by several problems, including limited resources, inadequate capacity building, inadequate supervision and feedback, and inadequate data management abilities. Accordingly, the study suggests that there should be enough employees who have received training in HMIS duties and that the system should have transparent governance structures that are shared with all healthcare professionals. Furthermore, it is imperative to carry out recurring support supervision for HMIS operations, employ creative approaches to encourage employees to complete HMIS-related duties, and base choices on routine health data. The study recommend regular training, performance monitoring using standard tools, and strengthening feedback loops to enhance HMIS utilisation for evidence-based decision-making.

## Acknowledgements

AcknowledgementsI would like to thank the Ministry of Health, the Synod of Livingstonia, and Copperbelt University for their crucial leadership support and methodological advice during this project. I would also like to express my gratitude to all the participants, clinical officers, and health surveillance assistants who helped in this study.

## Abbreviations

HMIS

Health Management Information System

SoLHD

Synod of Livingstonia Health Department

DHO

District Health Office

DHIS2

District Health Information System

DHMT

District Health Management Team

OPD

Open Patient Department

RHIS

Regional Health Information System

SOP

Standard Operating Procedures

## Authors’ contributions

Authors’ contributions The inception of this study was the result of the collaborative efforts of C.S. and R.M. The protocol was penned by L.M. and C.S., with valuable contributions from R.M. The delivery of the training was handled by C.S. and C.S., who were also responsible for overseeing the data collection process. Data analysis was carried out by C.S., with the assistance of V.N. The initial draft of the manuscript was written by C.S. C.S. and R.M. provided invaluable input during the revision process, offering constructive criticism that helped to refine the manuscript. The final manuscript was read and approved by all the contributors involved in the study.

## Funding

There was no funding.

## Data availability

No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

## Declarations

### Ethics approval and consent to participate

The Office of Postgraduate Studies at Copperbelt University’s ethical approval committee granted the study procedure ethical permission. Before their involvement in the research process, all participants provided written informed consent. The study participants were made aware of their complete autonomy to choose whether to engage in the study, and that they could even choose to stop answering questions at any point throughout the interview. No names are mentioned in the interview or reports, and responses are kept private.

### Consent for publication

All authors read the final copy and consented to the publication in this journal.

### Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

## Footnotes

**Publisher’s Note**

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## References

## Associated Data

*This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.*

### Data Availability Statement

No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

[^1]: 1.Mboera LEG, Rumisha SF, Mbata D, Mremi IR, Lyimo EP, Joachim C. Data utilisation and factors influencing the performance of the health management information system in Tanzania. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021;21(1):498. 10.1186/s12913-021-06559-1. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-021-06559-1)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8146252/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34030696/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mboera%20LEG,%20Rumisha%20SF,%20Mbata%20D,%20Mremi%20IR,%20Lyimo%20EP,%20Joachim%20C.%20Data%20utilisation%20and%20factors%20influencing%20the%20performance%20of%20the%20health%20management%20information%20system%20in%20Tanzania.%20BMC%20Health%20Serv%20Res.%202021;21\(1\):498.%2010.1186/s12913-021-06559-1.)\]

[^2]: 2.Bogale A. Implementation Status of Health Management Information System in Hospitals of South West Shoa Zone, Oromia, Central Ethiopia. ClinicoEconomics and outcomes research:CEOR, 2021; 13, 1–8. 10.2147/CEOR.S288998. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.2147/CEOR.S288998)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7797277/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33442275/)\]

[^3]: 3.Ouedraogo MO, Tolani M, Mambulasa J, McLaughlin K, Bassani DG, McKinnon B. Direct financial assistance for improved maternal and child health data: a pilot study supporting the health management information system in Malawi. BMC Health Serv Res. 2022;22(1):305. 10.1186/s12913-022-07680-5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-022-07680-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8898062/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35248035/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ouedraogo%20MO,%20Tolani%20M,%20Mambulasa%20J,%20McLaughlin%20K,%20Bassani%20DG,%20McKinnon%20B.%20Direct%20financial%20assistance%20for%20improved%20maternal%20and%20child%20health%20data:%20a%20pilot%20study%20supporting%20the%20health%20management%20information%20system%20in%20Malawi.%20BMC%20Health%20Serv%20Res.%202022;22\(1\):305.%2010.1186/s12913-022-07680-5.)\]

[^4]: 4.Sharma A, Rana SK, Prinja S, Kumar R. Quality of health management information system for maternal & child health care in Haryana State, India. PLoS ONE. 2016;11(2):e0148449. 10.1371/journal.pone.0148449. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148449)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4752326/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26872353/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Sharma%20A,%20Rana%20SK,%20Prinja%20S,%20Kumar%20R.%20Quality%20of%20health%20management%20information%20system%20for%20maternal%20&%20child%20health%20care%20in%20Haryana%20State,%20India.%20PLoS%20ONE.%202016;11\(2\):e0148449.%2010.1371/journal.pone.0148449.)\]

[^5]: 5.Rumisha SF, Lyimo EP, Mremi IR, Tungu PK, Mwingira VS, Mbata D, et al. Data quality of the routine health management information system at the primary healthcare facility and district levels in Tanzania. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2020;20(1):340. 10.1186/s12911-020-01366-w. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-020-01366-w)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7745510/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33334323/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Rumisha%20SF,%20Lyimo%20EP,%20Mremi%20IR,%20Tungu%20PK,%20Mwingira%20VS,%20Mbata%20D,%20et%20al.%20Data%20quality%20of%20the%20routine%20health%20management%20information%20system%20at%20the%20primary%20healthcare%20facility%20and%20district%20levels%20in%20Tanzania.%20BMC%20Med%20Inform%20Decis%20Mak.%202020;20\(1\):340.%2010.1186/s12911-020-01366-w.)\]

[^6]: 6.Kasambara A, Kumwenda S, Kalulu K, Lungu K, Beattie T, Masangwi S, et al. Assessment of implementation of the health management information system at the district level in Southern Malawi. Malawi Med J. 2017;29(3):240–6. 10.4314/mmj.v29i3.3. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4314/mmj.v29i3.3)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5811996/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29872514/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kasambara%20A,%20Kumwenda%20S,%20Kalulu%20K,%20Lungu%20K,%20Beattie%20T,%20Masangwi%20S,%20et%20al.%20Assessment%20of%20implementation%20of%20the%20health%20management%20information%20system%20at%20the%20district%20level%20in%20Southern%20Malawi.%20Malawi%20Med%20J.%202017;29\(3\):240%E2%80%936.%2010.4314/mmj.v29i3.3.)\]

[^7]: 7.Nyamtema AS. Bridging the gaps in the health management information system in the context of a changing health sector. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2010;10:36. 10.1186/1472-6947-10-36. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6947-10-36)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC2914713/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20579336/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Nyamtema%20AS.%20Bridging%20the%20gaps%20in%20the%20health%20management%20information%20system%20in%20the%20context%20of%20a%20changing%20health%20sector.%20BMC%20Med%20Inform%20Decis%20Mak.%202010;10:36.%2010.1186/1472-6947-10-36.)\]

[^8]: 8.Nshimyiryo A, Kirk CM, Sauer SM, Ntawuyirusha E, Muhire A, Sayinzoga F, et al. Health management information system (HMIS) data verification: a case study in four districts in Rwanda. PLoS ONE. 2020;15(7):e0235823. 10.1371/journal.pone.0235823. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0235823)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7367468/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32678851/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Nshimyiryo%20A,%20Kirk%20CM,%20Sauer%20SM,%20Ntawuyirusha%20E,%20Muhire%20A,%20Sayinzoga%20F,%20et%20al.%20Health%20management%20information%20system%20\(HMIS\)%20data%20verification:%20a%20case%20study%20in%20four%20districts%20in%20Rwanda.%20PLoS%20ONE.%202020;15\(7\):e0235823.%2010.1371/journal.pone.0235823.)\]

[^9]: 9.Endriyas M, Alano A, Mekonnen E, Ayele S, Kelaye T, Shiferaw M, et al. Understanding performance data: health management information system data accuracy in Southern nations nationalities and people’s region, Ethiopia. BMC Health Serv Res. 2019;19(1):175. 10.1186/s12913-019-3991-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-019-3991-7)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6423785/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30885204/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Endriyas%20M,%20Alano%20A,%20Mekonnen%20E,%20Ayele%20S,%20Kelaye%20T,%20Shiferaw%20M,%20et%20al.%20Understanding%20performance%20data:%20health%20management%20information%20system%20data%20accuracy%20in%20Southern%20nations%20nationalities%20and%20people%E2%80%99s%20region,%20Ethiopia.%20BMC%20Health%20Serv%20Res.%202019;19\(1\):175.%2010.1186/s12913-019-3991-7.)\]

[^10]: 10.Biemba G, Chiluba B, Yeboah-Antwi K, Silavwe V, Lunze K, Mwale RK, et al. A mobile-based community health management information system for community health workers and their supervisors in 2 districts of Zambia. Glob Health Sci Pract. 2017;5(3):486–94. 10.9745/GHSP-D-16-00275. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-D-16-00275)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5620344/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28855233/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Biemba%20G,%20Chiluba%20B,%20Yeboah-Antwi%20K,%20Silavwe%20V,%20Lunze%20K,%20Mwale%20RK,%20et%20al.%20A%20mobile-based%20community%20health%20management%20information%20system%20for%20community%20health%20workers%20and%20their%20supervisors%20in%202%20districts%20of%20Zambia.%20Glob%20Health%20Sci%20Pract.%202017;5\(3\):486%E2%80%9394.%2010.9745/GHSP-D-16-00275.)\]

[^11]: 11.Kabakama S, Ngallaba S, Musto R, Montesanti S, Konje E, Kishamawe C. Assessment of four common underfive children illnesses routine health management information system data for decision making at Ilemela municipal Council, Northwest Tanzania: a case series analysis. Int J Med Inform. 2016;93:85–91. 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.06.003. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.06.003)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27435951/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kabakama%20S,%20Ngallaba%20S,%20Musto%20R,%20Montesanti%20S,%20Konje%20E,%20Kishamawe%20C.%20Assessment%20of%20four%20common%20underfive%20children%20illnesses%20routine%20health%20management%20information%20system%20data%20for%20decision%20making%20at%20Ilemela%20municipal%20Council,%20Northwest%20Tanzania:%20a%20case%20series%20analysis.%20Int%20J%20Med%20Inform.%202016;93:85%E2%80%9391.%2010.1016/j.ijmedinf.2016.06.003.)\]

[^12]: 13.Odei-Lartey EO, Prah RKD, Anane EA, Danwonno H, Gyaase S, Oppong FB, et al. Utilization of the National cluster of district health information system for health service decision-making at the district, sub-district and community levels in selected districts of the Brong Ahafo region in Ghana. BMC Health Serv Res. 2020;20(1):514. 10.1186/s12913-020-05349-5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-020-05349-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7275484/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32505209/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Odei-Lartey%20EO,%20Prah%20RKD,%20Anane%20EA,%20Danwonno%20H,%20Gyaase%20S,%20Oppong%20FB,%20et%20al.%20Utilization%20of%20the%20National%20cluster%20of%20district%20health%20information%20system%20for%20health%20service%20decision-making%20at%20the%20district,%20sub-district%20and%20community%20levels%20in%20selected%20districts%20of%20the%20Brong%20Ahafo%20region%20in%20Ghana.%20BMC%20Health%20Serv%20Res.%202020;20\(1\):514.%2010.1186/s12913-020-05349-5.)\]

[^13]: 14.Aghaji A, Burchett HED, Oguego N, Hameed S, Gilbert C. Primary health care facility readiness to implement primary eye care in Nigeria: equipment, infrastructure, service delivery and health management information systems. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021;21(1):1360. 10.1186/s12913-021-07359-3. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-021-07359-3)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8690487/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34930271/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Aghaji%20A,%20Burchett%20HED,%20Oguego%20N,%20Hameed%20S,%20Gilbert%20C.%20Primary%20health%20care%20facility%20readiness%20to%20implement%20primary%20eye%20care%20in%20Nigeria:%20equipment,%20infrastructure,%20service%20delivery%20and%20health%20management%20information%20systems.%20BMC%20Health%20Serv%20Res.%202021;21\(1\):1360.%2010.1186/s12913-021-07359-3.)\]

[^14]: 15.Solomon M, Addise M, Tassew B, Balcha B, Abebe A. Data quality assessment and associated factors in the health management information system among health centers of Southern Ethiopia. PLoS ONE. 2021;16(10):e0255949. 10.1371/journal.pone.0255949. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0255949)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8550403/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34705833/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Solomon%20M,%20Addise%20M,%20Tassew%20B,%20Balcha%20B,%20Abebe%20A.%20Data%20quality%20assessment%20and%20associated%20factors%20in%20the%20health%20management%20information%20system%20among%20health%20centers%20of%20Southern%20Ethiopia.%20PLoS%20ONE.%202021;16\(10\):e0255949.%2010.1371/journal.pone.0255949.)\]

[^15]: 16.Kanfe SG, Debele GR, Berhanu RD, Ngusie HS, Ahmed MH. Utilisation of district health information system and its associated factors among health professionals working at public health facilities of the Southwest of Ethiopia: cross-sectional survey. BMJ Open. 2021;11(8):e046578. 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-046578. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2020-046578)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8362697/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34385240/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Kanfe%20SG,%20Debele%20GR,%20Berhanu%20RD,%20Ngusie%20HS,%20Ahmed%20MH.%20Utilisation%20of%20district%20health%20information%20system%20and%20its%20associated%20factors%20among%20health%20professionals%20working%20at%20public%20health%20facilities%20of%20the%20Southwest%20of%20Ethiopia:%20cross-sectional%20survey.%20BMJ%20Open.%202021;11\(8\):e046578.%2010.1136/bmjopen-2020-046578.)\]

[^16]: 17.Chanyalew MA, Yitayal M, Atnafu A, Tilahun B. Routine health information system utilization for evidence-based decision making in Amhara National regional state, Northwest Ethiopia: a multi-level analysis. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2021;21(1):28. 10.1186/s12911-021-01400-5. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-021-01400-5)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7836202/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33499838/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Chanyalew%20MA,%20Yitayal%20M,%20Atnafu%20A,%20Tilahun%20B.%20Routine%20health%20information%20system%20utilization%20for%20evidence-based%20decision%20making%20in%20Amhara%20National%20regional%20state,%20Northwest%20Ethiopia:%20a%20multi-level%20analysis.%20BMC%20Med%20Inform%20Decis%20Mak.%202021;21\(1\):28.%2010.1186/s12911-021-01400-5.)\]

[^17]: 18.Tadele MM, Yilma TM, Mekonnen ZA, Tilahun B. Routine health information use among healthcare providers in Ethiopia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Health Care Inform. 2023;30(1):e100693. 10.1136/bmjhci-2022-100693. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjhci-2022-100693)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10069504/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36997261/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Tadele%20MM,%20Yilma%20TM,%20Mekonnen%20ZA,%20Tilahun%20B.%20Routine%20health%20information%20use%20among%20healthcare%20providers%20in%20Ethiopia:%20a%20systematic%20review%20and%20meta-analysis.%20BMJ%20Health%20Care%20Inform.%202023;30\(1\):e100693.%2010.1136/bmjhci-2022-100693.)\]

[^18]: 19.O’Hagan R, Marx MA, Finnegan KE, Naphini P, Ng’ambi K, Laija K, Wilson E, Park L, Wachepa S, Smith J, Gombwa L, Misomali A, Mleme T, Yosefe S. National assessment of data quality and associated Systems-Level factors in Malawi. Global health. Sci Pract. 2017;5(3):367–81. 10.9745/GHSP-D-17-00177. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.9745/GHSP-D-17-00177)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5620335/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28963173/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?O%E2%80%99Hagan%20R,%20Marx%20MA,%20Finnegan%20KE,%20Naphini%20P,%20Ng%E2%80%99ambi%20K,%20Laija%20K,%20Wilson%20E,%20Park%20L,%20Wachepa%20S,%20Smith%20J,%20Gombwa%20L,%20Misomali%20A,%20Mleme%20T,%20Yosefe%20S.%20National%20assessment%20of%20data%20quality%20and%20associated%20Systems-Level%20factors%20in%20Malawi.%20Global%20health.%20Sci%20Pract.%202017;5\(3\):367%E2%80%9381.%2010.9745/GHSP-D-17-00177.)\]

[^19]: 20.Dehury RK, Chatterjee SC. Assessment of health management information system for monitoring of maternal health in Jaleswar block of Balasore District, Odisha, India. Indian J Public Health. 2018;62(4):259–64. 10.4103/ijph.IJPH\_203\_17. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.4103/ijph.IJPH_203_17)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30539886/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Dehury%20RK,%20Chatterjee%20SC.%20Assessment%20of%20health%20management%20information%20system%20for%20monitoring%20of%20maternal%20health%20in%20Jaleswar%20block%20of%20Balasore%20District,%20Odisha,%20India.%20Indian%20J%20Public%20Health.%202018;62\(4\):259%E2%80%9364.%2010.4103/ijph.IJPH_203_17.)\]

[^20]: 21.Colborn JM, Zulliger R, Da Silva M, Mathe G, Chico AR, Castel-Branco AC, et al. Quality of malaria data in public health facilities in three provinces of Mozambique. PLoS ONE. 2020;15(4):e0231358. 10.1371/journal.pone.0231358. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231358)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7170236/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32310983/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Colborn%20JM,%20Zulliger%20R,%20Da%20Silva%20M,%20Mathe%20G,%20Chico%20AR,%20Castel-Branco%20AC,%20et%20al.%20Quality%20of%20malaria%20data%20in%20public%20health%20facilities%20in%20three%20provinces%20of%20Mozambique.%20PLoS%20ONE.%202020;15\(4\):e0231358.%2010.1371/journal.pone.0231358.)\]

[^21]: 22.Jeffery C, Pagano M, Devkota B, Valadez JJ. Innovative approach to improve information accuracy in a two-district cross-sectional study in Bihar, India. BMJ Open. 2022;12(1):e051427. 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-051427. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-051427)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8739057/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34992107/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Jeffery%20C,%20Pagano%20M,%20Devkota%20B,%20Valadez%20JJ.%20Innovative%20approach%20to%20improve%20information%20accuracy%20in%20a%20two-district%20cross-sectional%20study%20in%20Bihar,%20India.%20BMJ%20Open.%202022;12\(1\):e051427.%2010.1136/bmjopen-2021-051427.)\]

[^22]: 23.Socio Economic Profile. M’mbelwa District Council (2017–2022); 2017.

[^23]: 24.Creswell JW. Research design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. 4th ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2014. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Creswell%20JW.%20Research%20design:%20Qualitative,%20Quantitative,%20and%20mixed%20methods%20approaches.%204th%20ed.%20Thousand%20Oaks,%20CA:%20Sage;%202014.)\]

[^24]: 25.Oppenheim AN. Questionnaire design, interviewing, and attitude measurement. London: Pinter; 1992. \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Oppenheim%20AN.%20Questionnaire%20design,%20interviewing,%20and%20attitude%20measurement.%20London:%20Pinter;%201992.)\]

[^25]: 26.Liu L, Desai MM, Fetene N, Ayehu T, Nadew K, Linnander E. District-Level health management and health system performance: the Ethiopia primary healthcare transformation initiative. Int J Health Policy Manage. 2022;11(7):973–80. 10.34172/ijhpm.2020.236. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.34172/ijhpm.2020.236)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9808198/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33327692/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Liu%20L,%20Desai%20MM,%20Fetene%20N,%20Ayehu%20T,%20Nadew%20K,%20Linnander%20E.%20District-Level%20health%20management%20and%20health%20system%20performance:%20the%20Ethiopia%20primary%20healthcare%20transformation%20initiative.%20Int%20J%20Health%20Policy%20Manage.%202022;11\(7\):973%E2%80%9380.%2010.34172/ijhpm.2020.236.)\]

[^26]: 27.Moukénet A, de Cola MA, Ward C, Beakgoubé H, Baker K, Donovan L, et al. Health management information system (HMIS) data quality and associated factors in Massaguet district, Chad. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2021;21(1):326. 10.1186/s12911-021-01684-7. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-021-01684-7)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8609810/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34809622/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mouk%C3%A9net%20A,%20de%20Cola%20MA,%20Ward%20C,%20Beakgoub%C3%A9%20H,%20Baker%20K,%20Donovan%20L,%20et%20al.%20Health%20management%20information%20system%20\(HMIS\)%20data%20quality%20and%20associated%20factors%20in%20Massaguet%20district,%20Chad.%20BMC%20Med%20Inform%20Decis%20Mak.%202021;21\(1\):326.%2010.1186/s12911-021-01684-7.)\]

[^27]: 28.Adane A, Adege TM, Ahmed MM, Anteneh HA, Ayalew ES, Berhanu D, et al. Routine health management information system data in Ethiopia: consistency, trends, and challenges. Glob Health Action. 2021;14(1):1868961. 10.1080/16549716.2020.1868961. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1080/16549716.2020.1868961)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7833046/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33446081/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Adane%20A,%20Adege%20TM,%20Ahmed%20MM,%20Anteneh%20HA,%20Ayalew%20ES,%20Berhanu%20D,%20et%20al.%20Routine%20health%20management%20information%20system%20data%20in%20Ethiopia:%20consistency,%20trends,%20and%20challenges.%20Glob%20Health%20Action.%202021;14\(1\):1868961.%2010.1080/16549716.2020.1868961.)\]

[^28]: 29.Begum T, Khan SM, Adamou B, Ferdous J, Parvez MM, Islam MS, Kumkum FA, Rahman A, Anwar I. (2020). Perceptions and experiences with district health information system software to collect and utilize health data in Bangladesh: a qualitative exploratory study. BMC health services research, 2020; 20(1), 465. 10.1186/s12913-020-05322-2 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-020-05322-2)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7249629/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32456706/)\]

[^29]: 30.Ngusie HS, Ahmed MH, Kasaye MD, Kanfe SG. Utilisation of health management information and its determinant factors among health professionals working at public health facilities in North Wollo Zone, Northeast ethiopia: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open. 2022;12(4):e052479. 10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052479. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052479)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8984035/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35383058/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ngusie%20HS,%20Ahmed%20MH,%20Kasaye%20MD,%20Kanfe%20SG.%20Utilisation%20of%20health%20management%20information%20and%20its%20determinant%20factors%20among%20health%20professionals%20working%20at%20public%20health%20facilities%20in%20North%20Wollo%20Zone,%20Northeast%20ethiopia:%20a%20cross-sectional%20study.%20BMJ%20Open.%202022;12\(4\):e052479.%2010.1136/bmjopen-2021-052479.)\]

[^30]: 31.Mwinnyaa G, Hazel E, Maïga A, Amouzou A. Estimating population-based coverage of reproductive, maternal, newborn, and child health (RMNCH) interventions from health management information systems: a comprehensive review. BMC Health Serv Res. 2021;21(Suppl 2):1083. 10.1186/s12913-021-06995-z. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-021-06995-z)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8542459/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34689787/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Mwinnyaa%20G,%20Hazel%20E,%20Ma%C3%AFga%20A,%20Amouzou%20A.%20Estimating%20population-based%20coverage%20of%20reproductive,%20maternal,%20newborn,%20and%20child%20health%20\(RMNCH\)%20interventions%20from%20health%20management%20information%20systems:%20a%20comprehensive%20review.%20BMC%20Health%20Serv%20Res.%202021;21\(Suppl%202\):1083.%2010.1186/s12913-021-06995-z.)\]

[^31]: 32.Shiferaw AM, Zegeye DT, Assefa S, Yenit MK. Routine health information system utilization and factors associated thereof among health workers at government health institutions in East Gojjam Zone, Northwest Ethiopia. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2017;17(1):116. 10.1186/s12911-017-0509-2. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-017-0509-2)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5545835/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28784115/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Shiferaw%20AM,%20Zegeye%20DT,%20Assefa%20S,%20Yenit%20MK.%20Routine%20health%20information%20system%20utilization%20and%20factors%20associated%20thereof%20among%20health%20workers%20at%20government%20health%20institutions%20in%20East%20Gojjam%20Zone,%20Northwest%20Ethiopia.%20BMC%20Med%20Inform%20Decis%20Mak.%202017;17\(1\):116.%2010.1186/s12911-017-0509-2.)\]

[^32]: 33.Samal J, Dehury RK. Perspectives and challenges of HMIS officials in the implementation of health management information system (HMIS) concerning maternal health services in Assam. J Clin Diagn Research: JCDR. 2016;10(6):LC07–9. 10.7860/JCDR/2016/16921.7955. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.7860/JCDR/2016/16921.7955)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4963674/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27504314/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Samal%20J,%20Dehury%20RK.%20Perspectives%20and%20challenges%20of%20HMIS%20officials%20in%20the%20implementation%20of%20health%20management%20information%20system%20\(HMIS\)%20concerning%20maternal%20health%20services%20in%20Assam.%20J%20Clin%20Diagn%20Research:%20JCDR.%202016;10\(6\):LC07%E2%80%939.%2010.7860/JCDR/2016/16921.7955.)\]

[^33]: 35.Gama A, Banda I, Kapaya F, Ingwe MM, Chiwaula J, Yeta A, et al. Factors associated with private health facilities reporting malaria in the National health management information system in Zambia: a cross-sectional study. Pan Afr Med J. 2020;37:203. 10.11604/pamj.2020.37.203.18829. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2020.37.203.18829)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7813650/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33505572/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Gama%20A,%20Banda%20I,%20Kapaya%20F,%20Ingwe%20MM,%20Chiwaula%20J,%20Yeta%20A,%20et%20al.%20Factors%20associated%20with%20private%20health%20facilities%20reporting%20malaria%20in%20the%20National%20health%20management%20information%20system%20in%20Zambia:%20a%20cross-sectional%20study.%20Pan%20Afr%20Med%20J.%202020;37:203.%2010.11604/pamj.2020.37.203.18829.)\]

[^34]: 36.Arsenault C, Yakob B, Kassa M, Dinsa G, Verguet S. Using health management information system data: case study and verification of institutional deliveries in Ethiopia. BMJ Glob Health. 2021;6(8):e006216. 10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006216. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2021-006216)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8383857/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34426404/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Arsenault%20C,%20Yakob%20B,%20Kassa%20M,%20Dinsa%20G,%20Verguet%20S.%20Using%20health%20management%20information%20system%20data:%20case%20study%20and%20verification%20of%20institutional%20deliveries%20in%20Ethiopia.%20BMJ%20Glob%20Health.%202021;6\(8\):e006216.%2010.1136/bmjgh-2021-006216.)\]

[^35]: 37.Meghani A, Rodríguez DC, Bilal H, Tripathi AB, Namasivayam V, Prakash R, Peters DH, Bennett S. Examining policy intentions and actual implementation practices: How organizational factors influence health management information systems in Uttar Pradesh, India. Social science & medicine, 2021; (1982), 286, 114291. 10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114291 \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2021.114291)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34418584/)\]

[^36]: 38.Ouedraogo M, Kurji J, Abebe L, Labonté R, Morankar S, Bedru KH, et al. A quality assessment of Health Management Information System (HMIS) data for maternal and child health in Jimma Zone, Ethiopia. PLoS One. 2019;14(3):e0213600. 10.1371/journal.pone.0213600. \[[DOI](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213600)\] \[[PMC free article](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6411115/)\] \[[PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30856239/)\] \[[Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?Ouedraogo%20M,%20Kurji%20J,%20Abebe%20L,%20Labont%C3%A9%20R,%20Morankar%20S,%20Bedru%20KH,%20et%20al.%20A%20quality%20assessment%20of%20Health%20Management%20Information%20System%20\(HMIS\)%20data%20for%20maternal%20and%20child%20health%20in%20Jimma%20Zone,%20Ethiopia.%20PLoS%20One.%202019;14\(3\):e0213600.%2010.1371/journal.pone.0213600.)\]